It was the best of times, it was the worst of times, it was the age of wisdom, it was the age of foolishness, it was the epoch of belief, it was the epoch of incredulity, it was the season of Light, it was the season of Darkness, it was the spring of hope, it was the winter of despair, we had everything before us, we had nothing before us, we were all going direct to Heaven, we were all going direct the other way – in short, the period was so far like the present period, that some of its noisiest authorities insisted on its being received, for good or for evil, in the superlative degree of comparison only.
There is no set length for a paragraph. It is possible, however, to have your paragraphs too long or too short. There are some guiding principles that will help you to get your paragraphs right.

The entire paragraph should concern itself with a single focus. If it begins with a one focus or major point of discussion, it should not end with another or wander within different ideas. This is one reason why paragraphs can become over-long. More will be said later about maintaining focus in your writing.

A paragraph should usually begin with an introductory sentence, which sets out the subject of that paragraph. The remainder of the paragraph should go on to explain and 'unpack' that initial sentence. If you find that you are writing about something different from your initial sentence, your paragraph is probably too long and your focus has wandered.

If you find that your paragraphs are too long:

Consider splitting a single long paragraph into two shorter ones. It is perfectly acceptable to begin a paragraph with a sentence connecting it to the previous paragraph.

Try to organise your writing so that your ideas are developed logically and sequentially. If you find that a paragraph contains more than one idea, you may need to reorganise your essay so that your ideas are developed more logically.

Look at the other paragraphs in your essay. Paragraphs should all be of roughly similar length. If you find that you have one or two paragraphs that are much longer than all the others, read them carefully and try to find out why.

If a paragraph is too short, it may be because the initial idea has not been developed sufficiently. To some extent, the level of development is dependent on the writer's purpose and the overall length of the essay. However, you should beware of paragraphs of only two or three sentences. Read them carefully and consider if your idea has been sufficiently developed.

If you think that an idea requires further development, consider some of the following strategies:

Use examples and illustrations

Cite data (facts, statistics, evidence, details, and others)

Examine testimony (what other people say such as quotes and paraphrases)

Use an anecdote or story

Define terms in the paragraph
I was reading the list of upcoming business meetings in a weekly email from The Seattle Times, when a meeting announcement caught my attention. The presenter was going to speak on a topic that interests me--the steps in growing one's business. I often weigh the advantages of getting bigger vs. staying small as a business, so I thought I would register for her talk.

But I wanted to know more about the presenter, so I clicked the link to her blog. That's when things went wrong.

Her latest blog entry was one huge paragraph 41 lines long. Can you imagine her 325 words in one big block? You don't have to--I have created a 325-word block of text below. Don't bother to read the words. They're just the text you are already reading.

Don't read this sample big, bad paragraph--just notice it.
I was reading the list of upcoming business meetings in a weekly email from The Seattle Times, when a meeting announcement caught my attention. The presenter was going to talk on a topic that interests me--the steps in growing one's business. I often weigh the advantages of getting bigger vs. staying small as a business, so I thought I would register for her talk. But I wanted to know more about the presenter, so I clicked the link to her blog. That's when things went wrong. Her latest blog entry was one huge paragraph 41 lines long. Can you imagine her 325 words in one big block? You don't have to--I have created a 325-word block of text here. I forced myself to read her paragraph. Hiding in it was some good information, but that info could not undo the negative impression. If that big, bad paragraph represents the woman's communication skills, I would be much better off finding another resource.I was reading the list of upcoming business meetings in a weekly email from The Seattle Times, when a meeting announcement caught my attention. The presenter was going to talk on a topic that interests me--the steps in growing one's business. I often weigh the advantages of getting bigger vs. staying small as a business, so I thought I would register for her talk. But I wanted to know more about the presenter, so I clicked the link to her blog. That's when things went wrong. Her latest blog entry was one huge paragraph 41 lines long. Can you imagine her 325 words in one big block? You don't have to--I have created a 325-word block of text here I forced myself to read her paragraph. Hiding in it was some good information, but that info could not undo the negative impression. If that big, bad paragraph represents the woman's communication skills, I would be much better off finding another resource.

I forced myself to read her paragraph. Hiding in it was some good information, but that info could not undo the negative impression of thoughts stuffed into one big paragraph. If that big, bad paragraph represents the woman's communication skills, I would be much better off finding another resource. I won't be attending that meeting.

A huge block of text, even when well organized, intimidates readers and turns off skimmers. Most of us know this, but if you work with people who are still churning out thick wads of text, talk with them about what works in today's messages. You will be doing your coworkers--and their readers--a huge favor.

Compare and contrast

Evaluate causes and reasons

Memorable Quotations from Benjamin Disraeli
(Kindle Book at Amazon)

Benjamin Disraeli (1804–81), 1st earl of Beaconsfield was a British statesman and writer. Of Jewish ancestry, he was baptized a Christian in 1817. His political essays and novels secured him an enduring place in English literature. Elected to Parliament in 1837, he grew into an exceptional, practical, and scathingly witty politician. In 1848 he became leader of the Tory protectionists. Disraeli supported a political partnership with the working classes, and as chancellor of the exchequer (1852, 1858–59, 1866–68), he “educated his party” (now the Conservative party) to pass the somewhat radical Reform Bill of 1867, which enfranchised about 2 million men, largely of the working class, and significantly helped his party. He became prime minister in 1868 but lost the office to Gladstone that same year. His second ministry (1874–80) generated many domestic reforms but is notable for its forceful foreign policy. The annexation of the Fiji islands (1874) and the Transvaal (1877), and the wars against the Afghans (1878–79) and the Zulus (1879), declared England an imperial world power. Disraeli's purchase of controlling shares of the Suez Canal strengthened British interests in the Mediterranean. After the Russo-Turkish War, he persuaded Turkey to cede Cyprus to Great Britain, and through the Congress of Berlin he lessened Russian power in the Balkans. A favorite of Queen Victoria, he had her crowned empress of India in 1876. His policy of democracy and imperialism energized his party. 
Examine effects and consequences.
             Booker T. Washington (1856-1915) was an American educator, who implored blacks to endeavor to elevate themselves through educational achievements and economic improvement. The son of a slave, Washington was born on a plantation in Franklin County, Virginia. After the American Civil War, his family moved to Malden, West Virginia, where he labored in a salt furnace and in coal mines, going to school whenever he could. He attended a newly-founded school for blacks, Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute (now Hampton University) from 1872 to 1875. After graduation he taught school in Malden and then studied at Wayland Seminary in Washington, D.C. Afterwards, he became a teacher at Hampton Institute, where he helped to establish a night school and was in charge of the industrial instruction of 75 Native Americans. The school was so effective that in 1881 the founder of Hampton Institute, General Samuel Chapman Armstrong, selected Washington as coordinator and principal of a black normal school in Tuskegee, Alabama (now Tuskegee University). Booker T. Washington made the institute into a key facility for industrial and agricultural training and in the process became a celebrated public speaker. On September 18, 1895, in Atlanta, Georgia, Washington made his famous compromise speech. In this address he urged blacks to acknowledge their inferior social position for the present and to endeavor to better themselves through vocational training and economic self-sufficiency. Numerous whites, gratified by his assessments, and many blacks, impressed by his esteem, acknowledged Washington as the leading spokesperson of the American blacks. Washington founded several organizations, including the National Negro Business League, to further black advancement. Among his books are The Future of the American Negro (1899), the autobiography Up from Slavery (1901), Life of Frederick Douglass (1907), The Story of the Negro (1909), and My Larger Education (1911). The site of the plantation where Washington was born is now a national monument.


